# Dog 101

By Kim Dawson, Matt Dawson

## Bedding

I use Vet Bed (which as the name suggests, is the bedding vets use).  Fleas can't live on it, and you just throw it in the washing machine every week and let line dry.  It is perfect for crate lining when travelling.

I will give you a link to buy more when the current lot gets threadbare.  Quality is worth paying for, I have some 8 year old pieces still going strong.  Cheap stuff gets ripped up.

## Digestive Upsets

I use "Direa" tablets to treat the runs in first instance.  They are 1 tablet every 10-20kg body weight, so 1.5 tablets for Ace.  If the runs last more than 48 hours, take him to the Vet.

## Ears

Clean the leather and ear canal with a baby wipe, once a month unless you see a black or smelly build up.  If Ace won't cooperate, see if you can find a groomer you both like.

## Eyes

Only an issue if you see a coloured discharge other than sleep buildup in morning.  Wipe with clean damp cloth if required. 

## Fleas

Most cost-effective way is to use Fido's Tick and Flea wash on him once a week.  Prevention is best when it comes to fleas.  Regular washing of dog and bedding (see "Bedding") should be enough.  

## Food

Decent quality dry food or wet food, some meat or meat scraps.  Avoid cooked bones or anything fatty or salty (e.g. Ham).  Too much fatty food can result in Pancreatitis, which is life threatening. Raw lean meat or raw dogs food formulations mixed in with dry food are fine.

## Grooming

You might only need to take him every 6-8 weeks if you are using them for ears, nails and teeth.  If you have a PetStock close to you they do a decent job without charging the earth.  There are usually mobile groomers as well, find one you both like.

### Bathing

Recommend washing dogs every 2 to 3 weeks. Staffys have sensitive skin so choose dog shampoo accordingly e.g. oatmeal tube from Coles.

## Heartworm

Decide on monthly (tablet, give at home) or yearly (injection, vet) heartworm preventative treatment.  Both have pros and cons.  Injection is super convenient, but not cheap and also if Ace has a reaction to it there is nothing you can do about it.  Monthly means you need to remember to do it, but you can discontinue immediately if required.  I have found a cheap regime that works. 

You will need to get him a heartworm test first as a precaution.

## Identification

Dog tag with dog's name and owner's phone number on it is cheap insurance in case your dog ever gets out.

Identification chip can be updated, or if necessary a replacement installed, by a vet.

## Nails

Ace isn't a fan of nail trims.  If you can hear clicking when he walks on tiles, they need trimming.  I tend to take my guys to a groomer once every 4-6 weeks minimum and get them to take care of it, along with ear cleaning and teeth brushing.  It's money well spent in my book.  See "Grooming". 

If you want to do them yourself, I can give you links to some resources that will show you how to do it.

## Teeth

I use a supplement called Simply Seaweed that can be added to food and will control a lot of plaque build up so you might be able to avoid ever needing to clean his teeth.  I use a lot of dried chews to also keep teeth clean-ish.  Many groomers will also do teeth if you are a regular client and provide a toothbrush.  If build up is really bad, the vets can sedate and scrape teeth.

## Ticks

I'm not sure how bad Wollongong is for ticks, you might need to treat Ace during the "season".  Most cost-effective way is to use Fido's Tick and Flea wash on him once a week.  The other option is a monthly chew such as Nexguard. Avoid Bravecto.

## Travel

Car harness with seatbelt loop, seatbelt clip-in attachment or travel in a crate that is securely tied down.  NSW is harsh on dog restraint enforcement.  In Qld the dog can be in a seatbelt attachment on the front seat, but that is a major no-on in NSW. 

When travelling, I take a supply of the water from home or spring water bottles.  Dogs can get upset stomachs from water treatment additives they are not used to.

Be prepared to stop every 2 hours to walk the dog and let them toilet.  Any longer than that might end in disaster.

Always have a few towels, chux and a supply of water and upholstery cleaner on hand.  Just in case.  Baby wipes are also handy.

## Training

Friends have recommended dog trainers:

- Wollongong, NSW: [The Dog Project](https://thedogproject.com.au/)

## Toys

Friends have recommended:

- Kong, frozen, with a tablespoon of peanut butter inside

## Vaccination

Ace should have a vaccination record but it might take a while to locate.  If you tell the vet the circumstances, they should be able to start a new one for you. 

He has been vaccinated sufficiently that he may never really need another booster, however it might be prudent to get him a C3 booster (1-year, not 3-year) at his next vet visit.  After that, just get a titre test done 3 years later.  Most vets are happy for you to titre to check immunity status provided you assure them you will vaccinate should the levels drop into the unprotected zone.

## Vet Visits

I tend to find a non-chain owned Vet, like a small local Vet or Clinic (not something attached to a PetStock or PetBarn such as Greencross vets).  Smaller Vets tend to take time with both of you.  Chain-owned Vets are usually all about billable minutes.

Friends have recommended:

- Wollongong, NSW: Unanderra Vet
- Wollongong, NSW: Vet on Crown St near ambulance station

## Weight Management

Ace is at a good weight now, I was buying weight management of mature dog food for him which is lower in calories.  Stick to his normal meal size.  If you suddenly realise you can't see the edge of his last rib, or he is losing his waist tuck-in, try reducing his meal size by 1/8^th^ and see how he looks after a week.

## Worming

I only worm every 6 months.  I can give you the link to a cheap all-round worming tablet.

## Yearly Health Check

Yearly vet visit to evaluate general health, weight, teeth, talk about any concerns etc.  This is the time for boosters, yearly treatments, blood tests.
